<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Andi's Blog: About the author</title>
<link rel="canonical" href="https://www.grois.info/about.xhtml"/>
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1"/>
</head>
<body>
<h1 id="about">About the author</h1>
<p>
Hi! My name's Andreas, and I'm working as a software developer at <a href="https://stillalive.games">stillalive studios</a>, making games with Unreal Engine. I haven't always been a coder though. Before I decided to follow my dream of game development I worked as a scientist. Yes, full cliché, with lab coat, safety goggles, manic laughter and everything. My research back then was about the physics of dilute magnetic semiconductors, or to be precise, about transition metal doping of Gallium Nitride. If you <a href="https://scholar.google.com/scholar?as_vis=1&amp;q=author:%22Andreas+Grois%22">search</a>, you might even find the one or other paper with my name in the authors' list.
</p>
<p>
That physics background has left me with two often conflicting areas of interest when it comes to game development. I do enjoy writing code close to the hardware, but I do also enjoy working with functional programming languages. You can probably already see where this is going. I am a confessing <a href="https://www.rust-lang.org">Rust</a> fanboy. It's not perfect, but it's a tool that mostly matches both those interests. Sadly I cannot use Rust at work yet, but that doesn't stop me from playing with it in my spare time.
</p>
<p>
While most of my spare time projects never get released, I did publish an app for <a href="https://sailfishos.org/">Sailfish OS</a>, namely a deterministic password generator that should be compatible to <a href="https://passwordmaker.org">PasswordMaker Pro</a>. The app is called "PassFish" and is available in the Jolla Harbour. If you want to have a laugh at my still rather bad Rust code, you can find the app's source code on GitHub. The main business logic is in the <a href="https://github.com/soulsource/passwordmaker-rs/">passwordmaker-rs</a> crate, while GUI and boilerplate can be found in <a href="https://github.com/soulsource/passfish">passfish</a> repo.
</p>
<p>
My other big hobby, apart from coding, is playing computer games. My favourite genre is <acronym title="Computer Role Playing Game">cRPG</acronym>, but I also play (preferably turn-based) <abbr title="Explore, Expand, Exploit, Exterminate">4X</abbr> games, city builders, simulation games, and whatever else catches my fancy. If I were to name my favourite games of all time, I'd probably say <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dwarf_Fortress">Dwarf Fortress</a>, <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Realms_of_Arkania:_Star_Trail">Realms of Arkania: Star Trail</a>, <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kerbal_Space_Program">Kerbal Space Program</a>, <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Settlers_II">The Settlers II: Veni, Vidi, Vici</a>, and <a href="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pathfinder:_Kingmaker">Pathfinder: Kingmaker</a>.
</p>
<p>
Since I value my mental health, I'm exclusively running Linux on my home PC. For this reason you can also expect the one or other post about running a Linux desktop here. In addition, all posts related to PC gaming will be about games I am playing on Linux. Be it native Linux games, Windows games running through <a href="https://www.winehq.org/">Wine</a>, DOS games running in <a href="https://www.dosbox.com/">DOSBox</a>,&#8230;
</p>
<p>
There is of course a lot more going on in my private life, but honestly, that's not stuff I am willing to share or discuss on the internet.
</p>
<hr/>
<h4 id="navigation">Navigation</h4>
<p>
<a href="/index.xhtml">Home</a>
</p>
</body>
</html>