<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.1//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml11/DTD/xhtml11.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en">
<head>
<title>Andi's Blog: Why is this blog so ugly?</title>
<link rel="top" title="Home" href="/index.xhtml"/>
<link rel="next" title="The maths behind passwordmaker-rs-0.2" href="/posts/2023-01/2023-01-29-the-maths-behind-passwordmaker-rs-0-2.xhtml"/>
<link rel="canonical" href="https://www.grois.info/posts/2023-01/2023-01-29-why-is-this-blog-so-ugly.xhtml"/>
<meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1"/>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Why is this blog so ugly?</h1>
<p>
That's because this website doesn't use any page-level style sheet. Most of the <acronym title="Extensible Hypertext Markup Language">XHTML</acronym> is also written by hand.
</p>
<p>
There are several reasons for this, and I would lie if I said that me being lazy wouldn't have played a role. However, the most important reason is that I wanted to make a statement, namely that I don't think that most modern websites are particularly well designed. They might be beautiful, but that's only a small part of a website's user experience. Other important parts of the <acronym title="user experience">UX</acronym> are that the website's content can be navigated easily, that the information the viewer wants to see is easy to find and presented in a readable way, that there are no distractions from the content, that the website loads fast, that it can be accessed on a Braille terminal,&#8230; Those aspects are where too many modern websites are lacking.
</p>
<p>
The lack of (almost) all custom design, with a focus on the text content, is meant to contrast this sad trend.
</p>
<h2 id="browser-settings">Browser settings</h2>
<p>
Most browsers have settings that allow to customize colours and fonts used by websites without a style sheet. In Mozilla Firefox, for instance, you can find the settings for default colour and font in the &quot;General&quot; category in the browser's preferences, under &quot;Language and Appearance&quot;.
</p>
<p>
A word of warning though: Many websites supply incomplete style sheets. They assume that the user's browser is configured to display black text on a white background and become unusable if one or both of these colors are changed.
</p>
<p>
An interesting feature most browsers offer is to intentionally ignore the style sheet supplied by a website. This can help to improve readability, if the style sheet of the site is particularly bad. Again, in Firefox, you can find the respective feature in the &quot;View&quot; menu (visible after pressing the <kbd>ALT</kbd> key). The entry is called &quot;Page Style&quot;.
</p>
<hr/>
<h4 id="navigation">Navigation</h4>
<p>
<a href="/index.xhtml">Home</a>
<a href="/posts/2023-01/2023-01-29-the-maths-behind-passwordmaker-rs-0-2.xhtml">Next: The maths behind passwordmaker-rs-0.2</a>
</p>
</body>
</html>